# R1. Introduction



## Static vs Dynamic Systems

A **static system's** present output depends only on its present input.

A **dynamic system's** present output depends on its present and past inputs.

A **linear system** is a system that follows:

$$y = mx+b$$

where $y$ is the system output and $x$ is the system input. 

**Linearization** is the process of taking a function and approximating it over a small range using the [Taylor Series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taylor_series) with one order:

$$f(x) \approx f(a) + \left(\frac{df}{dx}\right)_a(x-a)$$
This yields a linear function that is "valid" for $x \sim a$ . 

## Differential Equations

3.1

### Forcing Functions and Responses

The terms **input/forcing function** and **solution/response** are shown in this example ODE:

$$\underbrace{3\ddot x+ 7\dot x - 4t^2x}_\text{forcing function} = \underbrace{5+\sin(t)}_{\rm response}$$

A *homogenous* ODE has a response/solution of zero. Otherwise, it is *nonhomogenous*, like shown above. 

### Linear ODEs

A linear ODE follows the form of:

$$+\cdots + x^{(4)}a_4(t)+\dddot xa_3(t)+\ddot xa_2(t)+\dot xa_1(t)+xa_0(t)=g(t)$$

Any $x^2, x \dot x, \sqrt{\dot x},$ etc. will render an ODE *nonlinear*. 

### Response Types

In the solved ODE, $x(t)$ may have terms that depend or do not depend on $t$. The terms that depend on $t$ are said to be **transient** terms. Terms that do not depend on $t$ (i.e., constants), are said to be **steady state**. For instance:

$$x(t) = \underbrace{\frac ba}_{\text{Steady State}} +\underbrace{\left[x(0) - \frac ba \right]e^{-at}}_{\text{Transient}}$$

This can be rearranged as follows:

$$x(t) = \underbrace{x(0)e^{-at}}_\text{free} +\underbrace{\frac ba\left(1-e^{at}\right)}_\text{forced}$$

The **free response** is zero if the initial conditions are zero, and the **forced response** is zero when the input $b$ is zero.

> Not currently sure what the systematic way to define free/forced response is.


### Time Constants

When it is possible to write $e^{at}=e^{-t/\tau}$ , we call $\tau$ the time constant. Apparently this can be useful, just to standardize the $\exp$ equations. $e^{-t/\tau}\to \sim 0$ in about $t=4\tau$ (within 1\% of initial value). Good rule of thumb.







