# R8. Transient Response

If you have something with:

$$X(1-e^{-t/T})$$

where $T$ is a time constant, if $t=T$, the value will be:

$$X(1-e^{-T/T}) = 0.632 \approx 2/3$$

$4T$ is:

$$X(1-e^{-4T/T})= 0.982X \approx 98\%$$
^4t-ref

This is a good rule of thumb to have in mind.

This $T$ can be pulled from any 1st order transfer function of the form:

$$\frac{1}{Ts+1}$$
For example, in

$$\frac{1}{(b/k)s+1}, \Rightarrow T= \frac bk$$


## Free vibration with damping

For a mass spring damper system, we know the EOM is:

$$m \ddot x + b \dot x + kx = 0$$

Guessing that the solution fits $\displaystyle x=c_1 e^{\lambda t}$ , the expression becomes:

$$c_1Ae^{\lambda t}(m \lambda^2 + b \lambda + k) = 0$$

And because $e^{\lambda t} \ne t \forall t \in \mathbb R$ ,

$$m\lambda^2 + b \lambda + k =0$$
Which is the characteristic equation for the ODE. The root of $\lambda$ tells us important stuff about the system. For a 2nd order characteristic polynomial, the quadratic equation gives the root:

$$\lambda = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2-4mk}}{2m}$$
And we only actually need to look at the discriminant (what's in the sqrt):


| Discriminant   | Damping Ratio     | Root Types            | Descriptor        |
| -------------- | ----------------- | --------------------- | ----------------- |
| $$b^2-4mk <0$$ | $$0 < \zeta < 1$$ | 2 complex roots       | Underdamped       |
| $$b^2-4mk=0$$  | $$\zeta =1$$      | 1 repeated real root  | Critically damped |
| $$b^2-4mk>0$$  | $$\zeta >1$$      | 2 distinct real roots | Overdamped        |
The damping ratio can be expressed directly as:

$$\zeta = \frac{b}{2 \sqrt{mk}}$$

Underdamped will not only overshoot, but also oscillate. 

---

More **generally** (not specific to mass-spring-damper), if you have an equation of the type:

$$m \ddot x + b  \dot x + kx =0$$

You can write it as:

$$\ddot x + 2 \zeta \omega_n \dot x + \omega_n^2x=0$$

where:

- $\displaystyle \omega_n= \sqrt{\frac{k}{m}}$ is the undamped natural frequency.
	- This is from [Natural Frequency](L3.%20Spring%20Systems.md#Natural%20Frequency)
- $\displaystyle \zeta = \frac{b}{2 \sqrt{mk}}$ is the damping ratio.
- $\displaystyle \omega_d = \omega_n \sqrt{1-\zeta ^2}$ is the damped natural frequency. $\omega_d < \omega_n$. Only the underdamped response oscillates, so *this is only valid for underdamped cases.*


The state space representation is:

$$X(s) = \frac{(s+2\zeta \omega_n)x(0)+\dot x(0)}{s^2+2\zeta \omega_ns+\omega_n^2}$$

 
 `ss2tf` and `tf2ss` lets you go to and from state space to transfer functions in matlab.

## 2nd Order Transient Response Specifications

> Input $F(s)$; output $X(s)$ for the following


These systems are of the form:

$$X(s) = \frac{k}{ms^2+bs+k}\cdot\frac{r}{s}$$

where $r$ is the step input (e.g. $r=3$ when $f(t)=3$. **NOTE** I actually think this is not correct... im not sure what $r$ really is). This can also be written as:

$$X(s) = \frac{\omega_n^2}{s^2+2 \zeta \omega_n s + \omega_n^2}\cdot \frac{r}{s}$$

The time domain solution for this, keeping the assumption of a unit step scaled by $r$ is:

$$x(t) = r - \frac{r}{\sqrt{1-\zeta ^2}}e^{-\zeta \omega_nt}\sin\left( 
\omega_n \sqrt{1-\zeta^2} \cdot t + \phi \right)$$

where

$$\phi = \tan^{-1}\left(\frac{\displaystyle \sqrt{1-\zeta^2}}{\zeta}\right)$$


Systems of this nature will eventually converge to $r$:

$$x(\infty) = r$$

The maximum overshoot percent is:

$$M_p = \frac{x(t_p)-x(\infty)}{x(\infty)}$$

where $t_p$ is the time at the peak of the first overshoot. $t_s$ is the *settling time* and it is when the oscillation is under ahout $\pm 0.02r$ (i.e. ~2\% error).


$$M_p = \exp\left[ -\frac{\zeta \pi}{\sqrt{1-\zeta^2}}  \right]$$

and 

$$t_p  =\frac{\pi}{\omega_n \sqrt{1-\zeta^2}}$$

The following peak times are multiples of this(?).

> I want to verify this...

The settling time can be approximated to be:

$$t_s \approx \frac{4}{\zeta \omega_n}$$

For a 1st order system, this is $t_s \approx 4 T$ where $T$ is the time constant; shown [here](#^4t-ref). 

> For exams, I think I'll need to figure out how 

--- 

The envelope of the oscillation is given by:

$$x(t)=e^{-\zeta \omega_nt}$$
> I'm not sure if this is only for first/second order...


