# 2. Dimensionless Numbers

**Reynold's Number** is:

$$Re = \frac{\rho V L}{\mu} = \frac{VL}{\underbrace{\nu}_{\text{not sure}}} \approx = \frac{\text{internal forces (dynamic pressure)}}{\text{viscous forces (viscous stress)}}$$

If Reynold's number $\text{Re} < 1$, the flow is *creeping flow* aka stokes flow

If Reynold's number $\text{Re} < 10^3$, the flow is *laminar*

If Reynold's number $\text{Re} > 10^6$, the flow is *turbulent*

The line between laminar and turbulent is not strict; it fades between the two.

$$10 ^ 3 < \text{Re} < 10^6 \text{ (Transitional flow)}$$

---

**Mach Number**

$$\text{Ma} = \frac{v}{c}$$

where $c$ is the speed of sound.

For an ideal gas, the speed of sound is:

$$c = \sqrt{\frac{c_p R T}{c_v}}$$

For air, where $c_p \approx c_v$, this can break down to:

$$Ma \approx \sqrt{\frac{V^2}{RT}}= \sqrt{\frac{\rho V^2}{\rho RT}} = \sqrt{\frac{\text{dynamic pressure}}{\text{static pressure}}}$$

Dynamic pressure is the pressure caused by the inertia of the fluid. It is zero when not moving. 

If $M_a < 0.3$, compressibility can be neglected (effectively incompressible)

If $M_a < 0.7$, this is *subsonic flow*

If $0.7 <M_a < 1.3$, this is *transonic flow*

$1.3 < M_a < 5$, this is *supersonic flow*

---

**Froude Number**

Typically used to characterize waves.

$$F_r = \frac{V}{\sqrt{gL}} = \sqrt{\frac{\rho V^2}{\rho g L}} = \sqrt{\frac{\text{dynamic pressure}}{\text{hydrostatic pressure}}}$$


---

**Weber Number**

Relating to bubbles and drops "breaking up"

$$\text{We} = \frac{\rho V^2 L}{G}$$ where $G$ is surface tension.

This can also be expressed as:

$$\text{We}= \frac{\rho V^2}{G/L} = \frac{\text{dynamic pressure}}{\text{capilary pressure}}$$

A $\text{We} > 10$ will mean something will "break up", i.e. there isn't enough surface tension to hold it together.

**Capillary Number**

$$\text{Ca} = \frac{\mu V}{G} = \frac{\mu \frac VL}{\frac GL} = \frac{\text{viscous stress}}{\text{capillary pressure}}$$


This tells you the deformation of droplets in flow

**Bond number**

This gives you deformation in gravity

$$\text{B}_0 = \frac{\Delta \rho g L^2}{G} = \frac{\delta \rho g L}{G / L} = \frac{\text{gravitational pressure}}{\text{capilary pressure}}$$

If $B_0 < 1$, you will have a spherical drop.


**Drag and Lift coefficients**

These are from external flow.

$$C_d = \frac{F_d}{\frac12 \rho V^2L^2}$$ 
where $F_d$ is the drag force

$$C_l = \frac{F_l}{\frac 12 \rho V^2 L^2}$$

where $F_l$ is the lift force

$C_l / C_d = L/D$, which is the *lift to drag ratio*.

Jetliners tend to have a lift to drag ratio of about 15-20.

